Doc: L2LS Example (#1992)
aristanetworks/ansible-avd: ansible_collections/arista/avd/examples/l2ls-fabric/README.md

# Example for L2LS Fabric

## Introduction

> This example is meant to explore using AVD with an L2LS (Layer 2 Leaf Spine) Topology. The example topology shown below contains 2 Spines and 2 Leaf Pairs. The L2LS Fabric is purely Layer 2 with no routing of SVIs in the Fabric.  Later we will add in L3 routing functionality to this example`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example is meant to explore using AVD with an L2LS (Layer 2 Leaf Spine) Topology. The example topology shown below contains 2 Spines and 2 Leaf Pairs. The L2LS Fabric is Layer 2 only with no routing of SVIs in the Fabric.  Later L3 routing functionality will be added to this example.
```

Author: Hey @gmuloc. I am still in draft mode of writing the docs here.  Appreciate the comments.  I was rewriting much of this  today.   Please take a look now and see how it reads.  I plan to mark this PR ready for review next week.

![Figure: Arista L2LS physical topology](images/pure_L2LS_topo.png)

## AVD Setup

- Define Ansible Inventory (Hierarchical Groupings)
- Define AVD Fabric input variables (group_vars/host_vars)

### Sample Ansible Inventory

```yaml
DC1:
  children:
    DC1_FABRIC:
      children:
        DC1_SPINES:
          hosts:
            SPINE1:
              ansible_host: 172.100.100.101
            SPINE2:
              ansible_host: 172.100.100.102
        DC1_LEAFS:
          children:
            POD1:
              hosts:
                LEAF1:
                  ansible_host: 172.100.100.105
                LEAF2:
                  ansible_host: 172.100.100.106
            POD2:
              hosts:
                LEAF3:
                  ansible_host: 172.100.100.107
                LEAF4:
                  ansible_host: 172.100.100.108
    DC1_NETWORK_SERVICES:
      children:
        DC1_LEAFS:
        DC1_SPINES:
    DC1_NETWORK_PORTS:
      children:
        DC1_LEAFS:
        DC1_SPINES:
```
### Sample AVD group_vars/host_vars

> In the ansible variables, you need to set the following required variables:
> 
> - fabric_name = name of the fabric, must match a group name in your ansible inventory (ie. DC1_FABRIC)
> - design.type = l2ls
> - spine node type keys
> - leaf node type keys

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the Ansible variables,  the following variables are required:

- fabric_name = name of the fabric, must match a group name in your Ansible inventory (i.e. DC1_FABRIC)
- design.type = l2ls
- spine node type keys
- leaf node type keys
```

Author: Hey @gmuloc. I am still in draft mode of writing the docs here.  Appreciate the comments.  I was rewriting much of this  today.   Please take a look now and see how it reads.  I plan to mark this PR ready for review next week.

```yaml

> ### DC1_FABRIC.yml

Reviewer: maybe to be clear here let's use

```suggestion
### group_vars/DC1_FABRIC.yml
```

Author: done.

fabric_name: DC1_FABRIC

# Set Design Type to l2ls
design:

>   type: "l2ls"

Reviewer: are quotes needed?

Author: nope.  I removed them.

# Example for L2LS Fabric

## Introduction

This example includes and describes all the AVD files used to build a Layer 2 Leaf Spine (L2LS) Fabric, with the following nodes:

- 2 Spine nodes
- 4 Leaf nodes

> The network fabric in this example is purely Layer 2.  Routing is handled by an external Firewall/L3 Device.  Later, in this example, we will discuss moving routing to the Spines.  For now, we will focus on defining the fabric variables to build out this L2LS Topology.  Before we get started, we need to ensure that we have installed AVD, with necessary requirements, which are covered in the Installation & Requirements section.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The network fabric in this example is purely Layer 2. Routing is handled by an external Firewall/L3 Device. Later, in this example, we will discuss moving routing to the Spines. For now, we will focus on defining the fabric variables to build out this L2LS Topology. Before we get started, we need to ensure that we have installed AVD, with necessary requirements, which are covered in the Installation & Requirements section.
```

Reviewer 2: Please rephrase the `Later, in this example, we will discuss moving routing to the Spines.` I didn't get what is moving routing.

Author: removed extra spaces and rephrased this section.

The example is meant as a starting foundation. You may build more advanced fabrics based on this design. To keep things simple, the Arista eAPI will be used to communicate with the switches.

???+ info

    The configurations may also be applied with CloudVision with a few updates to your playbook and Ansible variables.

## Installation & Requirements

1. Install AVD - Installation guide found [here](../../docs/installation/collection-installation.md).
2. Install Ansible module requirements - Instructions found [here](../../docs/installation/requirements.md).
3. Run the following playbook which will copy Getting Started examples to your current working directory.

```bash
# current working directory: ~/ansible-avd-examples
ansible-playbook arista.avd.install_examples
```

> Output will show something similar to the following.  If not, check to ensure that AVD and all requirement modules are installed properly.  Also very that your ansible.cfg file has the proper Ansible collections_paths set.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Output will show something similar to the following. If not, please make sure that AVD and all requirements are installed properly. Also verify that the collections_paths in the ansible.cfg file is correct.
```

Author: updated with your suggestions.

    If the content of any file in the example is ***modified*** and the playbook is run again, the file ***will not*** be overwritten. However, if any file in the example is ***deleted*** and the playbook is run again, the file will be re-created.

## Design Overview

### Physical L2LS Topology

The drawing below shows the physical topology used in this example. The interface assignment shown here are referenced across the entire example, so keep that in mind if this example must be adapted to a different topology.

![Figure: 1](images/pure_L2LS_topo.svg)

???+ note

    The FW/L3 Device and individual hosts (A-D) in this example are not managed by AVD, but the switch ports connecting to these devices are.

## Basic EOS Switch Configuration

Basic connectivity between the Ansible controller host and the switches must be established before Ansible can be used to deploy configurations. The following should be configured on all switches:

- A hostname configured purely for ease of understanding.
- An IP enabled interface - in this example the dedicated out-of-band management interface is used.
- A username and password with the proper access privileges
- eAPI Enabled

???+ info

>     When using vEOS/cEOS virtual switches, `Management0` is used.  When using actual hardware switches, `Management1` is used.  The included basic switch configurations may need to be adjusted for your environment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    When using vEOS/cEOS virtual switches, `Management0` is used. When using actual hardware switches, `Management1` is used. The included basic switch configurations may need to be adjusted for your environment.
```

Author: fixed

Below is the basic configuration file for SPINE1:

```shell
--8<--
examples/l2ls-fabric/switch-basic-configurations/SPINE1.cfg
--8<--
```

## Ansible Inventory

Now that we understand the L2LS topology being used, we need to create the Ansible inventory that respresents this topology. The following is a textual and graphical representation of the Ansible inventory group variables and naming scheme used in this example:

``` text
- DC1
  - DC1_FABRIC
    - DC1_SPINES
    - DC1_LEAFS
      - POD1
      - POD2
```

> DC1 represents the highest level within the hierarchical grouping.  Ansible variables defined at this level will be applied to all nodes in the fabric.  Ansible groups have parent and child relationships. For example, both DC1_SPINES and DC1_LEAFS are children of DC1_FABRIC.  Groups of Groups are possible and allows variables to be shared at any level within the hierarchy.  DC1_NETWORK_SERVICES is a group that has 2 other groups defined as children:  DC1_SPINES and DC1_LEAFS.  The same applies to group named DC1_NETWORK_PORTS.  You will see these groups listed at the bottom of the inventory file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
DC1 represents the highest level within the hierarchical grouping. Ansible variables defined at this level will be applied to all nodes in the fabric. Ansible groups have parent and child relationships. For example, both DC1_SPINES and DC1_LEAFS are children of DC1_FABRIC. Groups of Groups are possible and allows variables to be shared at any level within the hierarchy. DC1_NETWORK_SERVICES is a group that has 2 other groups defined as children: DC1_SPINES and DC1_LEAFS. The same applies to group named DC1_NETWORK_PORTS. You will see these groups listed at the bottom of the inventory file.
```

Author: fixed

This naming convention makes it possible to easily extend anything, but as always, this can be changed based on your preferences. Just ensure that the names of all groups and hosts are unique.

![Figure: 2](images/ansible_groups.svg)

### inventory.yml

> The below inventory file represents 2 Spines and 2 Leaf Pairs (POD1 & POD2).  The nodes are defined under the groups DC1_SPINES and DC1_LEAFS, respectively.  We apply group variables (group_vars) to these groups to define their functionality and configurations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The below inventory file represents 2 Spines and 2 Leaf Pairs (POD1 & POD2). The nodes are defined under the groups DC1_SPINES and DC1_LEAFS, respectively. We apply group variables (group_vars) to these groups to define their functionality and configurations.
```

Author: fixed

???+ note

>     The Leaf nodes belong to subgroups POD1 and POD2.  Leaf nodes defined as a pair in this manner will have MLAG configured between them. In addition, you can filter the VLANs that are applied to the POD.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    The Leaf nodes belong to subgroups POD1 and POD2. Leaf nodes defined as a pair in this manner will have MLAG configured between them. In addition, you can filter the VLANs that are applied to the POD.
```

Author: fixed

It is important that the hostnames specified in the inventory exist either in DNS or in the hosts file on your Ansible host to allow successful name lookup and be able to reach the switches directly. A successful ping from the Ansible host to each inventory host allows to verify name resolution (e.g. ping SPINE1).

Alternatively, if there is no DNS available, or if devices need to be reached using a fully-qualified domain-name (FQDN), define variable ansible_host to be an IP address for each device.

```yaml
--8<--
examples/l2ls-fabric/inventory.yml
--8<--
```

## AVD Fabric Variables

> To apply AVD variables to the nodes in the fabric, we make use of Ansible group_vars. How and where you define the variables is your choice.  The below table of group_vars is one example of how to layout the fabric variables.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To apply AVD variables to the nodes in the fabric, we make use of Ansible group_vars. How and where you define the variables is your choice. The below table of group_vars is one example of how to layout the fabric variables.
```

Author: fixed

| group_vars/              | Description                                   |
| ------------------------ | --------------------------------------------- |
| DC1.yml                  | Global settings for all devices               |
| DC1_FABRIC.yml           | Fabric, Topology and Device settings          |
| DC1_SPINES.yml           | Device type for Spines                        |
| DC1_LEAFS.yml            | Device type for Leafs                         |
| DC1_NETWORK_SERVICES.yml | VLANs                                         |
| DC1_NETWORK_PORTS.yml    | Port Profiles and Connected Endpoint settings |

Here are the Ansible **group_vars** used in this example.

=== "DC1"

>     At the top level (DC1), the following variables are defined in **group_vars/DC1.yml**.  These Ansible variables apply to all nodes in the fabric and is a common place to set AAA, users, NTP, and management interface.  Update local_users and passwords for your environment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    At the top level (DC1), the following variables are defined in **group_vars/DC1.yml**. These Ansible variables apply to all nodes in the fabric and is a common place to set AAA, users, NTP, and management interface. Update local_users and passwords for your environment.
```

Author: fixed

# Example for L2LS Fabric

## Introduction

This example includes and describes all the AVD files used to build a Layer 2 Leaf Spine (L2LS) Fabric, with the following nodes:

- 2 Spine nodes
- 4 Leaf nodes

> The network fabric in this example is purely Layer 2. Routing is handled by an external Firewall/L3 Device. Later, in this example, we will discuss adding L3 routing to the Spines. For now, we will focus on defining the fabric variables to build out this L2LS Topology. Before we get started, we need to ensure that we have installed AVD, with necessary requirements, which are covered in the Installation & Requirements section.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The network fabric in this example is layer 2; an external firewall (FW) or layer 3 (L3) device will handle routing. Later, in this example, we will discuss adding L3 routing to the Spines. First, we will focus on defining the fabric variables to build this L2LS Topology. Before we get started, we need to ensure that we have installed AVD with the requirements covered in the Installation & Requirements section.
```

Author: fixed.

The example is meant as a starting foundation. You may build more advanced fabrics based on this design. To keep things simple, the Arista eAPI will be used to communicate with the switches.

???+ info

    The configurations may also be applied with CloudVision with a few updates to your playbook and Ansible variables.

## Installation & Requirements

1. Install AVD - Installation guide found [here](../../docs/installation/collection-installation.md).
2. Install Ansible module requirements - Instructions found [here](../../docs/installation/requirements.md).
3. Run the following playbook which will copy Getting Started examples to your current working directory.

```bash
# current working directory: ~/ansible-avd-examples
ansible-playbook arista.avd.install_examples
```

> Output will show something similar to the following. If not, please make sure that AVD and all requirements are installed properly. Also verify that the collections_paths in the ansible.cfg file is correct.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The output will show something similar to the following. If not, please ensure that AVD and all requirements are correctly installed. Also, verify the collections_paths in the ansible.cfg are correct.
```

Reviewer 4: Why are we talking about `collections_paths` when our advised installation method is using ansible-galaxy - hence using default directories.

Author: @ClausHolbechArista Agreed that default paths should be used, but someone may modify the ansible.cfg and change collection_paths to something else.  So I thought it was prudent to have them check it out.  I am fine removing it...

Author: @ClausHolbechArista I removed the reference to collection_paths.

Author: @JulioPDX updated with your suggestions.

    ├── playbook.yml
    └── README.md (this document)
```

???+ info

    If the content of any file in the example is ***modified*** and the playbook is run again, the file ***will not*** be overwritten. However, if any file in the example is ***deleted*** and the playbook is run again, the file will be re-created.

## Design Overview

### Physical L2LS Topology

The drawing below shows the physical topology used in this example. The interface assignment shown here are referenced across the entire example, so keep that in mind if this example must be adapted to a different topology.

![Figure: 1](images/pure_L2LS_topo.svg)

???+ note

    The FW/L3 Device and individual hosts (A-D) in this example are not managed by AVD, but the switch ports connecting to these devices are.

## Basic EOS Switch Configuration

Basic connectivity between the Ansible controller host and the switches must be established before Ansible can be used to deploy configurations. The following should be configured on all switches:

- A hostname configured purely for ease of understanding.
- An IP enabled interface - in this example the dedicated out-of-band management interface is used.

> - A username and password with the proper access privileges

Reviewer 3: Here we are mixing a list with punctuation or no punctuation. I would use one or the other but not both in the same list breakdown.

Author: @JulioPDX Agreed.  Thanks for pointing that out.  I modified the list.

- Management eAPI Enabled

???+ info

    When using vEOS/cEOS virtual switches, `Management0` is used. When using actual hardware switches, `Management1` is used. The included basic switch configurations may need to be adjusted for your environment.

Below is the basic configuration file for SPINE1:

```shell
--8<--
examples/l2ls-fabric/switch-basic-configurations/SPINE1.cfg
--8<--
```

## Ansible Inventory

> Now that we understand the L2LS topology being used, we need to create the Ansible inventory that respresents this topology. The following is a textual and graphical representation of the Ansible inventory group variables and naming scheme used in this example:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now that we understand the L2LS topology being used, we need to create the Ansible inventory that represents this topology. The following is a textual and graphical representation of the Ansible inventory group variables and naming scheme used in this example:
```

``` text
- DC1
  - DC1_FABRIC
    - DC1_SPINES
    - DC1_LEAFS
      - POD1
      - POD2
```

> DC1 represents the highest level within the hierarchical grouping. Ansible variables defined at this level will be applied to all nodes in the fabric. Ansible groups have parent and child relationships. For example, both DC1_SPINES and DC1_LEAFS are children of DC1_FABRIC. Groups of Groups are possible and allows variables to be shared at any level within the hierarchy. DC1_NETWORK_SERVICES is a group that has 2 other groups defined as children: DC1_SPINES and DC1_LEAFS. The same applies to group named DC1_NETWORK_PORTS. You will see these groups listed at the bottom of the inventory file.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
DC1 represents the highest level within the hierarchical grouping. Ansible variables defined at this level will be applied to all nodes in the fabric. Ansible groups have parent and child relationships. For example, both DC1_SPINES and DC1_LEAFS are children of DC1_FABRIC. Groups of Groups are possible and allow variables to be shared at any level within the hierarchy. For example, DC1_NETWORK_SERVICES is a group with two other groups defined as children: DC1_SPINES and DC1_LEAFS. The same applies to the group named DC1_NETWORK_PORTS. You will see these groups listed at the bottom of the inventory file.
```

> This naming convention makes it possible to easily extend anything, but as always, this can be changed based on your preferences. Just ensure that the names of all groups and hosts are unique.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This naming convention makes it possible to extend anything quickly, but this can be changed based on your preferences. Just ensure that the names of all groups and hosts are unique.
```

![Figure: 2](images/ansible_groups.svg)

### inventory.yml

The below inventory file represents 2 Spines and 2 Leaf Pairs (POD1 & POD2). The nodes are defined under the groups DC1_SPINES and DC1_LEAFS, respectively. We apply group variables (group_vars) to these groups to define their functionality and configurations.

???+ note

    The Leaf nodes belong to subgroups POD1 and POD2. Leaf nodes defined as a pair in this manner will have MLAG configured between them. In addition, you can filter the VLANs that are applied to the POD.

> It is important that the hostnames specified in the inventory exist either in DNS or in the hosts file on your Ansible host to allow successful name lookup and be able to reach the switches directly. A successful ping from the Ansible host to each inventory host allows to verify name resolution (e.g. ping SPINE1).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The hostnames specified in the inventory must exist either in DNS or in the hosts file on your Ansible host to allow successful name lookup and be able to reach the switches directly. A successful ping from the Ansible host to each inventory host allows for verified name resolution (e.g., ping SPINE1).
```

> Alternatively, if there is no DNS available, or if devices need to be reached using a fully-qualified domain-name (FQDN), define variable ansible_host to be an IP address for each device.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Alternatively, if no DNS is available or devices need to be reached using a fully-qualified domain-name (FQDN), define the variable ansible_host to be an IP address for each device.
```

```yaml
--8<--
examples/l2ls-fabric/inventory.yml
--8<--
```

## AVD Fabric Variables

> To apply AVD variables to the nodes in the fabric, we make use of Ansible group_vars. How and where you define the variables is your choice. The below table of group_vars is one example of how to layout the fabric variables.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To apply AVD variables to the nodes in the fabric, we make use of Ansible group_vars. How and where you define the variables is your choice. The table below of group_vars is one example of the layout of the fabric variables.
```

| group_vars/              | Description                                   |
| ------------------------ | --------------------------------------------- |
| DC1.yml                  | Global settings for all devices               |
| DC1_FABRIC.yml           | Fabric, Topology and Device settings          |
| DC1_SPINES.yml           | Device type for Spines                        |
| DC1_LEAFS.yml            | Device type for Leafs                         |
| DC1_NETWORK_SERVICES.yml | VLANs                                         |
| DC1_NETWORK_PORTS.yml    | Port Profiles and Connected Endpoint settings |

Here are the Ansible **group_vars** used in this example.

=== "DC1"
    At the top level (DC1), the following variables are defined in **group_vars/DC1.yml**. These Ansible variables apply to all nodes in the fabric and is a common place to set AAA, users, NTP, and management interface. Update local_users and passwords for your environment.

    You can create a sha512_password by creating a username and password on a switch and copy/paste it within double quotes here.

    ``` yaml
    --8<--
    examples/l2ls-fabric/group_vars/DC1.yml
    --8<--
    ```

=== "DC1_FABRIC"

>     At the Fabric level (DC1_FABRIC), the following variables are defined in **group_vars/DC1_FABRIC.yml**. At this level, you define fabric name, design type (l2ls), spine and leaf defaults, ansible authentication, and interface links. Other variables you must supply include: spanning-tree mode and priority along with an mlag IP pool.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    At the Fabric level (DC1_FABRIC), the following variables are defined in **group_vars/DC1_FABRIC.yml**. You define fabric name, design type (l2ls), spine and leaf defaults, ansible authentication, and interface links at this level. Other variables you must supply include: spanning-tree mode and priority along with an mlag IP pool.
```

    Variables applied under the node key type (spine/leaf) defaults section are inherited to nodes under each type. These variables may be overwritten under the node itself.

>     The spine interface used by a particular leaf is defined from the leaf's perspective with a variable called `uplink_switch_interfaces`. For example, LEAF2 has unique variable `uplink_switch_interfaces: [Ethernet2, Ethernet2]` defined. This means that LEAF2 is connected to SPINE1's Ethernet2 and SPINE2's Ethernet2, respectively.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    The spine interface used by a particular leaf is defined from the leaf's perspective with a variable called `uplink_switch_interfaces`. For example, LEAF2 has a unique variable `uplink_switch_interfaces: [Ethernet2, Ethernet2]` defined. This means that LEAF2 is connected to SPINE1's Ethernet2 and SPINE2's Ethernet2, respectively.
```

    ``` yaml
    --8<--
    examples/l2ls-fabric/group_vars/DC1_FABRIC.yml
    --8<--
    ```

=== "DC1_SPINES"

>     In an L2LS design, we have 2 types of spine nodes: `spine` and `l3spine`. In AVD. the node type defines the functionality and the EOS Cli configuration to be generated. For an L2LS design, we will use node type: spine. Later, we will add routing to the Spines by changing the node type to l3spine.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    In an L2LS design, we have two types of spine nodes: `spine` and `l3spine`. In AVD. the node type defines the functionality and the EOS Cli configuration to be generated. For an L2LS design, we will use node type: spine. Later, we will add routing to the Spines by changing the node type to l3spine.
```

    --8<--
    examples/l2ls-fabric/group_vars/DC1_LEAFS.yml
    --8<--
    ```

=== "DC1_NETWORK_SERVICES"
    You add VLANs to the Fabric by updating the **group_vars/DC1_NETWORK_SERVICES.yml**. Each VLAN will be given a name and a list of tags. The Tags can be used to filter the VLAN to specific Leaf Pairs (PODs). These variables are applied to spine and leaf nodes since they are a part of this inventory group of groups.

    ``` yaml
    --8<--
    examples/l2ls-fabric/group_vars/DC1_NETWORK_SERVICES.yml
    --8<--
    ```

=== "DC1_NETWORK_PORTS"
    Our fabric would not be complete without connecting some devices to it. We define connected endpoints and port profiles in **group_vars/DC1_NETWORKS_PORTS.yml**. Each endpoint's adapter defines which switch port(s) and port profile to use. In our example, we have servers/hosts and a firewall connected to the fabric. The connected endpoints keys are used for logical separation and apply to interface descriptions. These variables are applied to spine and leaf nodes since they are a part of this inventory group.
    ``` yaml
    --8<--
    examples/l2ls-fabric/group_vars/DC1_NETWORK_PORTS.yml
    --8<--
    ```

## The Playbooks

> Now that we have all of our Ansible variables (AVD inputs) defined, it is time to generate some configs. To make things simple, we provide 2 playbooks. One playbook will allow you to just build and view EOS Cli intended configurations per device. The second playbook has an additional task to also deploy the configurations to your switches. The playbooks are provided in the tabs below. The playbook is very simple as it imports 2 AVD roles: eos_designs and eos_cli_config_gen that do all the heavy lifting. The combination of these 2 roles produce recommended configurations that are part of Arista's Design Guides.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now that we have defined all of our Ansible variables (AVD inputs), it is time to generate some configs. To make things simple, we provide two playbooks. One playbook will allow you to build and view EOS CLI intended configurations per device. The second playbook also has an additional task to deploy the configurations to your switches. The playbooks are provided in the tabs below. The playbook is straightforward as it imports two AVD roles: eos_designs and eos_cli_config_gen, which do all the heavy lifting. The combination of these two roles produces recommended configurations that are part of Arista's Design Guides.
```

Reviewer 3: Careful with use of CLI and Cli in different sections of the doc.

Author: agreed.  CLI all CAPS is the correct way.  I will double check the rest and fix them if they exist.

```bash
### Build configurations & Push Configs to switches
ansible-playbook playbooks/deploy.yml
```

### EOS Intended Configurations

You configuration files should be similar to these.

=== "SPINE1"

    ```shell
    --8<--
    examples/l2ls-fabric/intended/configs/SPINE1.cfg
    --8<--
    ```

=== "SPINE2"

    ```shell
    --8<--
    examples/l2ls-fabric/intended/configs/SPINE2.cfg
    --8<--
    ```

=== "LEAF1"

    ```shell
    --8<--
    examples/l2ls-fabric/intended/configs/LEAF1.cfg
    --8<--
    ```

=== "LEAF2"

    ```shell
    --8<--
    examples/l2ls-fabric/intended/configs/LEAF2.cfg
    --8<--
    ```

=== "LEAF3"

    ```shell
    --8<--
    examples/l2ls-fabric/intended/configs/LEAF3.cfg
    --8<--
    ```

=== "LEAF4"

    ```shell
    --8<--
    examples/l2ls-fabric/intended/configs/LEAF4.cfg
    --8<--
    ```

## Add Routing to Spines

In our example, we used an external L3/FW Device to route between subnets. This is very typical in a Layer 2 only environment. To route on the spines, we remove the L3/FW device from the topology and shift the SVIs to the Spines.

![Figure: 3](images/L2LS_Spine_routing.svg)

> The following group_vars need updated to enable L3 routing on the Spines.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following group_vars need updating to enable L3 routing on the Spines.
```

- DC1_SPINES.yml
- DC1_FABRIC.yml
- DC1_NETWORK_SERVICES.yml

> The updates changes are noted in the tabs below.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The updated changes are noted in the tabs below.
```

=== "DC1_SPINES.yml"

    Update type to `l3spine`. This makes it a routing device.

    ``` yaml
    ---
    ### group_vars/DC1_SPINES.yml

    type: l3spine
    ```

=== "DC1_FABRIC.yml"

    Update with the following changes and additions.

>     - Change the node key **spine** to **l3spine** to match the node type set previously in DC1_SPINES.yml.

Reviewer 3: Mixing sentence and non sentence in lists should be avoided

    - Add **loopback_ipv4_pool**
    - Add **mlag_peer_l3_ipv4_pool**
    - Add **virtual_router_mac_address**

>     Here are needed updates to DC1_FABRIC.yml. Use your own IP pools.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Here are the required updates to DC1_FABRIC.yml. Use your own IP pools.
```

Author: fixed.

    ``` yaml
    # Node Key must be l3spine
    l3spine:
      defaults:
        platform: cEOS-LAB
        spanning_tree_mode: mstp
        spanning_tree_priority: 4096
        # Loopback is used to generate a router-id
        loopback_ipv4_pool: 1.1.1.0/24
        mlag_peer_ipv4_pool: 192.168.0.0/24
        # Needed for L3 peering across the MLAG Trunk
        mlag_peer_l3_ipv4_pool: 10.1.1.0/24
        # Used for SVI  Virual MAC address
        virtual_router_mac_address: 00:1c:73:00:dc:01
        mlag_interfaces: [Ethernet47, Ethernet48]
    ```

=== "DC1_NETWORK_SERVICES.yml"

    Update Network Services to use L3 SVIs.

    ???+ Note

>         To create L3 SVIs on the spines, we need to utilize an L3 VRF. In our case, we will use the default VRF. `VLANS` is simply a name to organize VRFs and SVIs. You may change it to your liking.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        To create L3 SVIs on the spines, we need to utilize an L3 VRF. In our case, we will use the default VRF. `VLANS` is simply a name for organizing VRFs and SVIs. You may change it to your liking.
```

# Example for L2LS Fabric

## Introduction

This example includes and describes all the AVD files used to build a Layer 2 Leaf Spine (L2LS) Fabric, with the following nodes:

- 2 Spine nodes
- 4 Leaf nodes

> The network fabric in this example is layer 2; an external firewall (FW) or layer 3 (L3) device will handle routing. Later, in this example, we will discuss adding L3 routing to the Spines. First, we will focus on defining the fabric variables to build this L2LS Topology. Before we get started, we need to ensure that we have installed AVD with the requirements covered in the Installation & Requirements section.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The network fabric in this example is layer 2; an external firewall (FW) or layer 3 (L3) device will handle routing. Later, in this example, we will discuss adding L3 routing to the Spines. But, first, we will focus on defining the fabric variables to build this L2LS Topology. Before we start, we must ensure that we have installed AVD with the requirements covered in the Installation & Requirements section.
```

Alternatively, if DNS is not available, define the variable ansible_host to be an IP address for each device.

```yaml
--8<--
examples/l2ls-fabric/inventory.yml
--8<--
```

## AVD Fabric Variables

To apply AVD variables to the nodes in the fabric, we make use of Ansible group_vars. How and where you define the variables is your choice. The group_vars table below is one example of AVD fabric variables.

| group_vars/              | Description                                   |
| ------------------------ | --------------------------------------------- |
| DC1.yml                  | Global settings for all devices               |
| DC1_FABRIC.yml           | Fabric, Topology, and Device settings         |
| DC1_SPINES.yml           | Device type for Spines                        |
| DC1_LEAFS.yml            | Device type for Leafs                         |
| DC1_NETWORK_SERVICES.yml | VLANs                                         |
| DC1_NETWORK_PORTS.yml    | Port Profiles and Connected Endpoint settings |

The tabs below show the Ansible **group_vars** used in this example.

=== "DC1"

>     At the top level (DC1), the following variables are defined in **group_vars/DC1.yml**. These Ansible variables apply to all nodes in the fabric and is a common place to set AAA, users, NTP, and management interface. Update local_users and passwords for your environment.

Reviewer 3: Consider ending sentence with settings/variables. Example "These Ansible variables apply to all nodes in the fabric and is a common place to set AAA, users, NTP, and management interface settings."

Author: fixed

    examples/l2ls-fabric/group_vars/DC1_SPINES.yml
    --8<--
    ```

=== "DC1_LEAFS"
    In an L2LS design, we have one type of leaf node: `leaf`.

    ``` yaml
    --8<--
    examples/l2ls-fabric/group_vars/DC1_LEAFS.yml
    --8<--
    ```

=== "DC1_NETWORK_SERVICES"
    You add VLANs to the Fabric by updating the **group_vars/DC1_NETWORK_SERVICES.yml**. Each VLAN will be given a name and a list of tags. The tags filter the VLAN to specific Leaf Pairs. These variables are applied to spine and leaf nodes since they are a part of this group.

    ``` yaml
    --8<--
    examples/l2ls-fabric/group_vars/DC1_NETWORK_SERVICES.yml
    --8<--
    ```

=== "DC1_NETWORK_PORTS"
    Our fabric would not be complete without connecting some devices to it. We define connected endpoints and port profiles in **group_vars/DC1_NETWORKS_PORTS.yml**. Each endpoint's adapter defines which switch port(s) and port profile to use. In our example, we have four hosts and a firewall connected to the fabric. The connected endpoints keys are used for logical separation and apply to interface descriptions. These variables are applied to spine and leaf nodes since they are a part of this inventory group.

>     ``` yaml

Reviewer 3: Add empty line between information and code block

Author: fixed

    --8<--
    examples/l2ls-fabric/group_vars/DC1_NETWORK_PORTS.yml
    --8<--
    ```

## The Playbooks

Now that we have defined all of our Ansible variables (AVD inputs), it is time to generate some configs. To make things simple, we provide two playbooks. One playbook will allow you to build and view EOS CLI intended configurations per device. The second playbook has an additional task to deploy the configurations to your switches. The playbooks are provided in the tabs below. The playbook is straightforward as it imports two AVD roles: eos_designs and eos_cli_config_gen, which do all the heavy lifting. The combination of these two roles produces recommended configurations that follow Arista Design Guides.

=== "build.yml"

>     ```yaml

Reviewer 3: Add empty line within code blocks

Author: fixed

    --8<--
    examples/l2ls-fabric/build.yml
    --8<--
    ```

> === "deploy.yml"

Reviewer 3: Add empty line within code blocks

Author: fixed

                  SPINE1:
                    ip_address: 10.10.10.2/24
                  SPINE2:
                    ip_address: 10.10.10.3/24
              20:
                name: 'GREEN-NET'
                tags: [greenzone]
                enabled: true
                ip_virtual_router_addresses:
                  - 10.20.20.1
                nodes:
                  SPINE1:
                    ip_address: 10.20.20.2/24
                  SPINE2:
                    ip_address: 10.20.20.3/24
              30:
                name: 'ORANGE-NET'
                tags: [orangezone]
                enabled: true
                ip_virtual_router_addresses:
                  - 10.30.30.1
                nodes:
                  SPINE1:
                    ip_address: 10.30.30.2/24
                  SPINE2:
                    ip_address: 10.30.30.3/24
    ```

Now re-run your playbook and build the new configs. The intended/configs for the spines will have been updated with L3 SVIs.

```bash
ansible-playbook playbooks/build.yml
```

If you wish to deploy these changes, then simply run the deploy playbook.

```bash
ansible-playbook playbooks/deploy.yml
```

## Next steps

> Try building your own topology.

Reviewer 3: Add single trailing newline to end of file

Author: newline already exists.  Line 419

???+ note

    The FW/L3 Device and individual hosts (A-D) in this example are not managed by AVD, but the switch ports connecting to these devices are.

## Basic EOS Switch Configuration

Basic connectivity between the Ansible controller host and the switches must be established before Ansible can be used to deploy configurations. The following should be configured on all switches:

- Switch Hostname
- IP enabled interface
- Username and Password defined
- Management eAPI enabled

???+ info

    When using vEOS/cEOS virtual switches, `Management0` is used. When using actual hardware switches, `Management1` is used. The included basic switch configurations may need to be adjusted for your environment.

Below is the basic configuration file for SPINE1:

```shell
--8<--
examples/l2ls-fabric/switch-basic-configurations/SPINE1.cfg
--8<--
```

## Ansible Inventory

Now that we understand the physical L2LS topology, we need to create the Ansible inventory that represents this topology. The following is a textual and graphical representation of the Ansible inventory group variables and naming scheme used in this example:

``` text
- DC1
  - DC1_FABRIC
    - DC1_SPINES
    - DC1_LEAFS

>       - POD1

Reviewer 4: POD naming can be confusing since PODs in AVD is a full Leaf-Spine setup.
I suggest to rename to `RACK1`, `RACK2`

Author: 1. Simplified inventory my putting all leafs into a single group DC1_LEAFS
2. Changed all references of POD1 and POD2 to RACK1 and RACK2.
3. Updated drawings the same

      - POD2
  - DC1_NETWORK_SERVICES
    - DC1_SPINES
    - DC1_LEAFS
  - DC1_NETWORK_PORTS
    - DC1_SPINES
    - DC1_LEAFS
```

DC1 represents the highest level within the hierarchy. Ansible variables defined at this level will be applied to all nodes in the fabric. Ansible groups have parent and child relationships. For example, both DC1_SPINES and DC1_LEAFS are children of DC1_FABRIC. Groups of Groups are possible and allow variables to be shared at any level within the hierarchy. For example, DC1_NETWORK_SERVICES is a group with two other groups defined as children: DC1_SPINES and DC1_LEAFS. The same applies to the group named DC1_NETWORK_PORTS. You will see these groups listed at the bottom of the inventory file.

> This naming convention makes it possible to extend anything quickly, but can be changed based on your preferences. The names of all groups and hosts are must be unique.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This naming convention makes it possible to extend anything quickly but can be changed based on your preferences. The names of all groups and hosts must be unique.
```

![Figure: 2](images/ansible_groups.svg)

### inventory.yml

The below inventory file represents 2 Spines and 2 Leaf Pairs (POD1 & POD2). The nodes are defined under the groups DC1_SPINES and DC1_LEAFS, respectively. We apply group variables (group_vars) to these groups to define their functionality and configurations.

???+ note

>     The Leaf nodes belong to subgroups POD1 and POD2. Leaf nodes defined as a pair in this manner will have MLAG configured between them. In addition, you can filter the VLANs that are applied to the POD.

Reviewer 4: Not true. We do _not_ require inventory groups to be per pair. I usually just put all leaf switches in a single group. The MLAG pairing only happens under the `l3leaf` config.

Author: removed this note...

The hostnames specified in the inventory must exist either in DNS or in the hosts file on your Ansible host to allow successful name lookup and be able to reach the switches directly. A successful ping from the Ansible host to each inventory host verifies name resolution (e.g., ping SPINE1).

Alternatively, if DNS is not available, define the variable ansible_host to be an IP address for each device.

```yaml
--8<--
examples/l2ls-fabric/inventory.yml
--8<--
```

## AVD Fabric Variables

To apply AVD variables to the nodes in the fabric, we make use of Ansible group_vars. How and where you define the variables is your choice. The group_vars table below is one example of AVD fabric variables.

| group_vars/              | Description                                   |
| ------------------------ | --------------------------------------------- |
| DC1.yml                  | Global settings for all devices               |

> | DC1_FABRIC.yml           | Fabric, Topology, and Device settings          |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| DC1_FABRIC.yml           | Fabric, Topology, and Device settings         |
```

> | DC1_FABRIC.yml           | Fabric, Topology and Device settings          |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| DC1_FABRIC.yml           | Fabric, Topology, and Device settings          |
```

    Variables applied under the node key type (spine/leaf) defaults section are inherited to nodes under each type. These variables may be overwritten under the node itself.

    The spine interface used by a particular leaf is defined from the leaf's perspective with a variable called `uplink_switch_interfaces`. For example, LEAF2 has a unique variable `uplink_switch_interfaces: [Ethernet2, Ethernet2]` defined. This means that LEAF2 is connected to SPINE1's Ethernet2 and SPINE2's Ethernet2, respectively.

    ``` yaml
    --8<--
    examples/l2ls-fabric/group_vars/DC1_FABRIC.yml
    --8<--
    ```

=== "DC1_SPINES"
    In an L2LS design, there are two types of spine nodes: `spine` and `l3spine`. In AVD. the node type defines the functionality and the EOS CLI configuration to be generated. For an L2LS design, we will use node type: spine. Later, we will add routing to the Spines by changing the node type to l3spine.

    ``` yaml
    --8<--
    examples/l2ls-fabric/group_vars/DC1_SPINES.yml
    --8<--
    ```

=== "DC1_LEAFS"

>     In an L2LS design, we have 1 type of leaf node: `leaf`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    In an L2LS design, we have one type of leaf node: `leaf`.
```

    ``` yaml
    --8<--
    examples/l2ls-fabric/group_vars/DC1_LEAFS.yml
    --8<--
    ```

=== "DC1_NETWORK_SERVICES"

>     You add VLANs to the Fabric by updating the **group_vars/DC1_NETWORK_SERVICES.yml**. Each VLAN will be given a name and a list of tags. The Tags can be used to filter the VLAN to specific Leaf Pairs (PODs). These variables are applied to both spine and leaf nodes since they are a part of this group.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    You add VLANs to the Fabric by updating the **group_vars/DC1_NETWORK_SERVICES.yml**. Each VLAN will be given a name and a list of tags. The tags filter the VLAN to specific Leaf Pairs (PODs). These variables are applied to spine and leaf nodes since they are a part of this group.
```

    ``` yaml
    --8<--
    examples/l2ls-fabric/group_vars/DC1_NETWORK_SERVICES.yml
    --8<--
    ```

=== "DC1_NETWORK_PORTS"

>     Our fabric would not be complete without connecting some devices to it. We define connected endpoints and port profiles in **group_vars/DC1_NETWORKS_PORTS.yml**. Each endpoint's adapter defines which switch port(s) and port profile to use. In our example, we have 4 hosts and a firewall connected to the fabric. The connected endpoints keys are used for logical separation and apply to interface descriptions. These variables are applied to spine and leaf nodes since they are a part of this inventory group.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Our fabric would not be complete without connecting some devices to it. We define connected endpoints and port profiles in **group_vars/DC1_NETWORKS_PORTS.yml**. Each endpoint's adapter defines which switch port(s) and port profile to use. In our example, we have four hosts and a firewall connected to the fabric. The connected endpoints keys are used for logical separation and apply to interface descriptions. These variables are applied to spine and leaf nodes since they are a part of this inventory group.
```

    ``` yaml
    --8<--
    examples/l2ls-fabric/group_vars/DC1_NETWORK_PORTS.yml
    --8<--
    ```

## The Playbooks

Now that we have defined all of our Ansible variables (AVD inputs), it is time to generate some configs. To make things simple, we provide two playbooks. One playbook will allow you to build and view EOS CLI intended configurations per device. The second playbook has an additional task to deploy the configurations to your switches. The playbooks are provided in the tabs below. The playbook is straightforward as it imports two AVD roles: eos_designs and eos_cli_config_gen, which do all the heavy lifting. The combination of these two roles produces recommended configurations that follow Arista Design Guides.

=== "build.yml"
    ```yaml
    --8<--
    examples/l2ls-fabric/build.yml
    --8<--
    ```

=== "deploy.yml"
    ```yaml
    --8<--
    examples/l2ls-fabric/deploy.yml
    --8<--
    ```

### Playbook Run

To build the configurations files, run the playbook called `build.yml`.

```bash
### Build configurations
ansible-playbook playbooks/build.yml
```

> After the playbook run finishes, EOS CLI intended configuration files were written to `intended/configs`. Take a look.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After the playbook run finishes, EOS CLI intended configuration files were written to `intended/configs`.
```

To build and deploy the configurations to your switches, run the playbook called `deploy.yml`. This assumes that your Ansible host has access and authentication rights to the switches. Those auth variables were defined in DC1_FABRIC.yml.

```bash
### Build configurations & Push Configs to switches
ansible-playbook playbooks/deploy.yml
```

### EOS Intended Configurations

> You configuration files should be similar to these.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Your configuration files should be similar to these.
```

    - Change the node key **spine** to **l3spine** to match the node type set previously in DC1_SPINES.yml
    - Add **loopback_ipv4_pool**
    - Add **mlag_peer_l3_ipv4_pool**
    - Add **virtual_router_mac_address**

    Update DC1_FABRIC.yml with the following recommended settings. Use your own IP pools.

    ``` yaml
    # Node Key must be l3spine
    l3spine:
      defaults:
        platform: cEOS-LAB
        spanning_tree_mode: mstp
        spanning_tree_priority: 4096
        # Loopback is used to generate a router-id
        loopback_ipv4_pool: 1.1.1.0/24
        mlag_peer_ipv4_pool: 192.168.0.0/24
        # Needed for L3 peering across the MLAG Trunk
        mlag_peer_l3_ipv4_pool: 10.1.1.0/24
        # Used for SVI Virual MAC address
        virtual_router_mac_address: 00:1c:73:00:dc:01
        mlag_interfaces: [Ethernet47, Ethernet48]
    ```

=== "DC1_NETWORK_SERVICES.yml"

    Update Network Services to use L3 SVIs.

    ???+ Note

        To create L3 SVIs on the spines, we need to utilize an L3 VRF. In our case, we will use the default VRF. `VLANS` is simply a name for organizing VRFs and SVIs. You may change it to your liking.

    ``` yaml
    ---
    tenants:

>       VLANS:

Reviewer 4: I would strongly suggest a different name. Call it `EXAMPLE` or `MYFABRIC` or something to avoid confusing the user by bringing vlans into this.

Author: What bothers me about this is the tenants key name.  Isn't there a place where we can change the name of `tenants:`?

Author: Tenants does not make sense for an L2LS topo like it does for EVPN Fabric.

Reviewer 4: Yes you can, but it will not be simple for a user. We have `network_services_keys`

Author: Is this possible to change tenants key with?

```
network_services_keys:
  - name: < key_1 >
  - name: < key_2 >
```

Reviewer 2: Yes, that is the way to change the tenant key name.

Author: I think we'll leave it tenants and change VLANs to something else.

Author: changed to MY_FABRIC.

# Example for L2LS Fabric

## Introduction

> This example is meant to explore using AVD with an L2LS (Layer 2 Leaf Spine) Topology.  The example topology shown below contains to Spines and 2 Leaf Pairs.  The L2LS Fabric is purely Layer 2 with no routing of SVIs in the Fabric.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This example is meant to explore using AVD with an L2LS (Layer 2 Leaf Spine) Topology. The example topology shown below contains 2 Spines and 2 Leaf Pairs. The L2LS Fabric is purely Layer 2 with no routing of SVIs in the Fabric.
```

Author: Thanks @tgodaA.  I am just getting started on writing this documentation.  Lots more updates to come...
